README.md, before:

# Learning DOTAs via mutation testing

## Overview

This project contains the implementation of an equivalence testing approach for [DOTAs learning](https://github.com/Leslieaj/OTALearning), called mutation-based equivalence testing.  The basic idea/framework comes from [Learning from Faults: Mutation Testing in Active Automata Learning](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-319-57288-8_2). In order to apply the basic framework to the Deterministic One-Clock Timed Automata setting, we further propose several improvements, including two special mutation operators, a heuristic test case generation algorithm, and a score-based test case selection method. By setting reasonable parameters, the newly developed mutation-based equivalence testing is a viable technique for implementing equivalence oracle to find counterexamples in a DOTAs learning setup.

## Installation

The project was developed using Python3, and you only need to download the project, but there are a few prerequisites before running：

- Python3.7.* (or high)
- graphviz (used for drawing)

## Usage

### 1. Run experiment

#### 1) Run case study
To run the cases in experiments by Mutation_new:
```shell
$python3 mutation_new.py
```
To run the cases in experiments by Mutant_checking:
```shell
$python3 mutant_checking.py
```

To run the cases in experiments by Heuristic_random_testing:
```shell
$python3 heuristic_random_testing.py
```

#### 2) Run experiments of improvements
To run the cases in experiments by pure random generation method:
```shell
$python3 generation_random.py
```
To run the cases in experiments by A&T's generation method:
```shell
$python3 generation_A&T.py
```

To run the cases in experiments only with timed mutation operator:
```shell
$python3 operator_timed.py
```

To run the cases in experiments only with split operator:
```shell
$python3 operator_split.py
```

To run the cases in experiments by greedy selection method:
```shell
$python3 selection_greedy.py
```

#### 3) Run your own model:

> `model.json` is a JSON file about the structure of the model. Although this is a black box learning tool, in the prototype stage, users should provide model structure files to model DOTAs to be learned.

**model.json**

```json
{
    "states": ["1", "2"],
    "inputs": ["a", "b", "c"],
    "trans": {
        "0": ["1", "a", "[3,9)", "r", "2"],
        "1": ["1", "b", "[1,5]", "r", "2"],
        "2": ["1", "c", "[0,3)", "n", "1"],
        "3": ["2", "a", "(5,+)", "n", "1"],
        "4": ["2", "b", "(7,8]", "n", "1"],
        "5": ["2", "c", "(4,+)", "r", "1"]
    },
    "initState": "1",
    "acceptStates": ["2"]
}
```

*Explanation:*

- "states": the set of the name of locations;
- "inputs": the input alphabet;
- "trans": the set of transitions in the form `id : [name of the source location, input action, guards, reset, name of the target location];`
  - "+" in a guard means INFTY;
  - "r" means resetting the clock, "n" otherwise
- "initState": the name of initial location;
- "acceptStates": the set of the name of accepting locations.

In the process of use, you must ensure that the naming is correct and the content follows the prescribed format.



### 2. Parameter Settings

For mutation-based equivalence testing, we have set the generally applicable parameters in advance, but users can also customize the relevant parameters in the files `./test/random_testing.py` and `./test/mutation_testing.py`.

## Output

If we learn the target DOTA successfully, the final DOTA will be drawn and displayed as a PDF file. And all results will be stored in a folder named `results` and a file named `result.json`.

Experiment results of benchmarks are in `results/smart_teacher.zip` and sorted in `results.xlsx`.

Commit message:

add:example; fix:main.py

README.md, after:

# Learning DOTAs via mutation testing

## Overview

This project contains the implementation of an equivalence testing approach for [DOTAs learning](https://github.com/Leslieaj/OTALearning), called mutation-based equivalence testing.  The basic idea/framework comes from [Learning from Faults: Mutation Testing in Active Automata Learning](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-319-57288-8_2). In order to apply the basic framework to the Deterministic One-Clock Timed Automata setting, we further propose several improvements, including two special mutation operators, a heuristic test case generation algorithm, and a score-based test case selection method. By setting reasonable parameters, the newly developed mutation-based equivalence testing is a viable technique for implementing equivalence oracle to find counterexamples in a DOTAs learning setup.

## Installation

The project was developed using Python3, and you only need to download the project, but there are a few prerequisites before running：

- Python3.7.* (or high)
- graphviz (used for drawing)

## Usage
A example model `example.json` is given in folder `benchmarks`, run `main.py` to learn the example model with our method.
The result and drawn model images are in `./results/example/`. 

All experiment cases are in folder `benchmarks`.

### 1. Run experiments

#### 1) Run case study
To run the cases in experiments by Mutation_new:
```shell
$python3 mutation_new.py
```
To run the cases in experiments by Mutant_checking:
```shell
$python3 mutant_checking.py
```

To run the cases in experiments by Heuristic_random_testing:
```shell
$python3 heuristic_random_testing.py
```

#### 2) Run experiments of improvements
To run the cases in experiments by pure random generation method:
```shell
$python3 generation_random.py
```
To run the cases in experiments by A&T's generation method:
```shell
$python3 generation_A&T.py
```

To run the cases in experiments only with timed mutation operator:
```shell
$python3 operator_timed.py
```

To run the cases in experiments only with split operator:
```shell
$python3 operator_split.py
```

To run the cases in experiments by greedy selection method:
```shell
$python3 selection_greedy.py
```

#### 3) Run your own model:

> `model.json` is a JSON file about the structure of the model. Although this is a black box learning tool, in the prototype stage, users should provide model structure files to model DOTAs to be learned.

**model.json**

```json
{
    "states": ["1", "2"],
    "inputs": ["a", "b", "c"],
    "trans": {
        "0": ["1", "a", "[3,9)", "r", "2"],
        "1": ["1", "b", "[1,5]", "r", "2"],
        "2": ["1", "c", "[0,3)", "n", "1"],
        "3": ["2", "a", "(5,+)", "n", "1"],
        "4": ["2", "b", "(7,8]", "n", "1"],
        "5": ["2", "c", "(4,+)", "r", "1"]
    },
    "initState": "1",
    "acceptStates": ["2"]
}
```

*Explanation:*

- "states": the set of the name of locations;
- "inputs": the input alphabet;
- "trans": the set of transitions in the form `id : [name of the source location, input action, guards, reset, name of the target location];`
  - "+" in a guard means INFTY;
  - "r" means resetting the clock, "n" otherwise
- "initState": the name of initial location;
- "acceptStates": the set of the name of accepting locations.

In the process of use, you must ensure that the naming is correct and the content follows the prescribed format.



### 2. Parameter Settings

For mutation-based equivalence testing, we have set the generally applicable parameters in advance, but users can also customize the relevant parameters in the files `./testing/random_testing.py` and `./testing/mutation_testing.py`.

## Output

If we learn the target DOTA successfully, the final DOTA will be drawn and displayed as a PDF file. And all results will be stored in a folder named `results` and a file named `result.json`.

Experiment results of benchmarks are in `./results/smart_teacher.zip` and sorted in `results.xlsx`.
